System trays and native notifications are key to making Electron apps feel like desktop software - they let users access the app without opening the main window and receive real-time updates. Electron provides built-in modules to implement both features with minimal setup, ensuring consistency across Windows, macOS, and Linux.​
For system trays (also called "status icons"), use Electron's Tray module. First, prepare an icon file (PNG or ICO, with multiple sizes for different OSes - e.g., 16x16 and 32x32 pixels for Windows, 22x22 for macOS). In the main process, import Tray and Menu (for context menus), then create a tray instance: const tray = new Tray('path/to/icon.png'). Add a tooltip (shown on hover) with tray.setToolTip('Your App Name').​
To add a context menu (right-click options), create a Menu with items like "Open App" or "Quit": use Menu.buildFromTemplate() with an array of menu options. For example, a template item for opening the main window could trigger mainWindow.show() when clicked. Assign the menu to the tray with tray.setContextMenu(contextMenu). Handle tray clicks: on Windows, a single click often opens the app, so add a tray.on('click') listener to show the main window. On macOS, clicks typically show the context menu, so no extra code is needed - Electron handles this by default.​
For native notifications, use the Notification module, which integrates with the OS's built-in notification system. First, configure basic options in the main process: const notification = new Notification({ title: 'Update Available', body: 'A new version of the app is ready to install.', icon: 'path/to/notification-icon.png' }). Show the notification with notification.show().​
Add interactivity to notifications: use notification.on('click') to trigger actions (e.g., opening the app or navigating to the update page). Note OS-specific requirements: macOS requires a CFBundleIdentifier in your app's info.plist (generated during packaging) for notifications to appear. Windows may show notifications in the Action Center, so test to ensure they're not hidden. Linux notifications work with most desktop environments (GNOME, KDE) but may require extra permissions in some cases.​
Best practices: Use tray icons that match the OS's design language (light icons for dark themes, dark for light). Keep notification content concise - avoid long bodies that get truncated. For critical notifications (e.g., error alerts), add a sound (using the sound: true option on Windows/macOS) to grab the user's attention. Test both features on all target OSes to ensure consistency - what works on Windows may behave differently on macOS.​
In short, system trays and notifications enhance your Electron app's desktop integration. With Electron's Tray and Notification modules, you can implement these features quickly, making the app more accessible and user-friendly.
