Compressing files and folders in Linux helps save disk space, speed up file transfers (like sending files over email or FTP), and organize multiple files into a single archive. Linux supports several common compression formats - such as ZIP, GZIP, BZIP2, and TAR - and provides built-in commands to handle compression and extraction. Understanding how to work with these formats lets you efficiently manage large files and archives. This article covers the most useful compression tools, how to compress files, and how to extract them for different formats.​
The ZIP format is one of the most widely compatible, working across Linux, Windows, and macOS. To create a ZIP archive, use the zip command: zip archive.zip file1.txt file2.jpg creates a zip file named archive.zip containing file1.txt and file2.jpg. To compress a folder and all its contents, add the -r (recursive) option: zip -r project.zip project-folder zips the entire project-folder into project.zip. You can also add a password to protect the archive with the -e option: zip -e secret.zip private-docs/ prompts you to enter a password, which is required to extract the files later.​
Extracting ZIP files uses the unzip command. unzip archive.zip extracts all files from archive.zip into the current directory. To extract to a specific folder (instead of the current directory), use the -d option: unzip archive.zip -d extracted-files puts all extracted files into the extracted-files folder. To view the contents of a ZIP file without extracting, use unzip -l archive.zip - this lists all files in the archive, along with their sizes and modification dates. Note that zip and unzip may not be installed by default on some Linux distributions; you can install them with sudo apt install zip unzip (Debian/Ubuntu) or sudo dnf install zip unzip (Fedora/CentOS).​
For Linux-native compression, the TAR format (often combined with GZIP or BZIP2) is commonly used, especially for backing up folders or distributing software. TAR itself is an archiving tool (it bundles files into a single .tar file without compressing them), so it's usually paired with a compression tool like GZIP to create .tar.gz (or .tgz) files. To create a compressed .tar.gz archive, use tar -czf archive.tar.gz folder/ - the options break down as: -c (create a new archive), -z (compress with GZIP), -f (specify the archive filename). For better compression (though slower), use BZIP2 instead of GZIP by replacing -z with -j, creating a .tar.bz2 file: tar -cjf archive.tar.bz2 folder/.​
Extracting TAR archives depends on the compression format. For .tar.gz or .tgz files, use tar -xzf archive.tar.gz - -x means extract, -z handles GZIP compression, -f specifies the archive. For .tar.bz2 files, use tar -xjf archive.tar.bz2 (replace -z with -j for BZIP2). To extract to a specific directory, add the -C option: tar -xzf archive.tar.gz -C target-folder extracts the archive into target-folder. Like with ZIP, you can list the contents of a TAR archive without extracting using tar -tf archive.tar.gz ( -t means list contents).​
Another common tool is GZIP itself, which compresses single files (not folders) into .gz files. gzip file.txt compresses file.txt into file.txt.gz and deletes the original file. To keep the original file, use gzip -k file.txt ( -k for keep). To decompress a .gz file, use gunzip file.txt.gz - this restores the original file.txt and deletes the .gz file. For folders, GZIP isn't used directly (since it only handles single files) - instead, use TAR with GZIP (as covered earlier) to bundle and compress folders.​
Common compression scenarios include backing up personal files (use .tar.gz for Linux backups), sharing multiple photos (use ZIP for cross-platform compatibility), or downloading software (many Linux tools are distributed as .tar.gz files). When choosing a format, prioritize compatibility: use ZIP if sharing with Windows/macOS users, and TAR-based formats for Linux-only use. Also, note that compression speed and ratio vary - GZIP is faster but compresses less than BZIP2, so choose based on whether you need speed or space savings.​
In short, Linux offers flexible tools for compressing and extracting files. By mastering zip, unzip, and tar commands for different formats, you can save disk space, speed up transfers, and manage archives efficiently. Whether you're backing up data or sharing files, these tools are essential for daily Linux use.
